.\" ai-tools(1) -- project-lifecycle CLI of Agent Tools Restricted.
.\" Kept in sync with the CLI's usage() text by tests/unit/man.sh, which
.\" compares the long-option sets of both; @AI_TOOLS_VERSION@ is substituted
.\" at deploy time (install.sh install_subst / the RPM %prep), like the CLI.
.TH AI-TOOLS 1 "" "ai-tools @AI_TOOLS_VERSION@" "Agent Tools Restricted"
.SH NAME
ai-tools \- manage the projects a sandboxed coding agent may work in
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ai-tools
.I command
.RI [ options ]
.RI [ path ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B ai-tools
registers, secures, and hands back the projects the sandboxed coding agent
(Claude Code, running as the unprivileged
.B ai-tools
system account) may work in. Run it as your own login user \(em never as root
and never as the sandbox account; the CLI refuses both. Steps that need root
(secret lockdown, ownership, SELinux labels) invoke
.B sudo
themselves and prompt for your password.
.PP
Every
.I path
argument defaults to the current working directory. Every yes/no question
states its default in the prompt
.RB ( "[Y/n] (default: Yes)" );
plain Enter \(em and any run without a terminal \(em takes the default, which
always falls on the safe side of the question.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B \-\-project\-claim \fR[\fB\-y\fR] [\fIpath\fR]
Claim a real project in place so the agent works your actual tree: register it
(allowlist and git safe.directory), scan for and lock down secret-named files
.I before
any access is granted, set the shared group and ACL, and apply the SELinux
project label. Idempotent \(em a re-claim runs only the missing steps and
repairs interior permission drift behind the same confirm. Access to the
repository's git history
.RB ( .git )
is a separate opt-in prompt.
.TP
.B \-\-project\-create
Alias for
.BR \-\-project\-claim .
.TP
.B \-\-project\-unclaim \fR[\fIpath\fR]
Reverse a claim: revert the SELinux label, drop both registries, and \(em behind
its own confirm \(em hand the tree to a chosen group with the agent's write
access revoked. The directory stays on disk.
.TP
.B \-\-project\-remove
Alias for
.BR \-\-project\-unclaim .
.TP
.B \-\-sandbox\-create \fR[\fIpath\fR]
Shallow-clone the repository at
.I path
into the sandbox area so the agent never reads the origin's full git history.
The clone is born owner-only; tip-commit secrets are locked down first, and
only past that gate is the clone opened to the agent and registered. A declined
or failed lockdown stops fail-closed \(em the clone stays private and
unregistered; re-run this command on the clone path to resume securing it.
.TP
.B \-\-sandbox\-push \fR[\fIpath\fR]
Push the sandbox clone's commits to its dedicated remote branch
.RB ( ai\-tools/sandbox\- <user> / <leaf> ).
.TP
.B \-\-sandbox\-remove \fR[\fIpath\fR]
Delete a sandbox clone and unregister it, warning about unpushed commits
first. The remote branch stays for others to merge.
.TP
.B \-\-lockdown \fR[\fIpath\fR] [\fB\-n\fR|\fB\-y\fR]
Lock secret-named files under the project (\fB.env\fR, \fB*.key\fR, ...) to
owner-only, revoking the agent's read access. Runs via
.BR sudo .
.TP
.B \-\-reclaim \fR[\fB\-\-full\fR] [\fIpath\fR]
Hand agent-written files under the project back to you (including the
.B .git
tree the per-session sweeps skip). Runs via
.BR sudo .
.TP
.B \-\-relabel
Restore the SELinux label on the agent entrypoint after a Node upgrade, for
when the automatic post-upgrade relabel did not run.
.TP
.B \-\-list
List registered projects, real and sandbox.
.TP
.B \-\-version
Print the installed version.
.TP
.B \-\-help
Print the command summary.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-y ", " \-\-yes
For
.BR \-\-project\-claim :
pre-answer only the proceed prompt; the secret-lockdown, git-history, and
ancestor-traversal questions still ask. For
.BR \-\-lockdown :
skip the confirmation.
.TP
.BR \-n ", " \-\-dry\-run
For
.BR \-\-lockdown :
report what would be locked without changing anything.
.TP
.B \-\-full
For
.BR \-\-reclaim :
also reclaim the heavy skipped trees
.RB ( node_modules ", " .venv ,
\&...), not just the work tree and
.BR .git .
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.config/ai-tools/allowed-projects
Per-operator allowlist of project paths; a
.RB \(oq ! \(cq-prefixed
line excludes a subtree. Gates where sessions launch \(em not a read boundary.
.TP
.I /etc/ai-tools/operator.conf
Operator registry and skip-list overrides.
.TP
.I /var/opt/ai-tools/sandbox-projects/
The sandbox-clone area;
.I /var/opt/ai-tools/README.md
documents the push-only clone workflow.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR sudo (8),
.BR setfacl (1).
.PP
The lifecycle guide (claim vs sandbox decision, what each prompt grants,
recovery paths):
.I docs/project\-lifecycle.md
in the source repository
.RI ( https://github.com/dag\-node/tools\-agent\-tools\-restricted ).
